<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLV: Night and Morning in the Spheres</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-45" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h2><h3 epub:type="title">Night and Morning in the Spheres</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>As in a banquet hall, when all the torches and lamps are extinguished, one little lamp is left burning before a sacred picture in a corner, so Kamanita was left behind, alone, in universal night.</p>
			<p>For just as his body was enfolded by the astral substance of that Buddha likeness, so his soul was completely absorbed by the Buddha thought; and that was the oil which fed the flame of this little lamp.</p>
			<p>The whole conversation he had had with the Master in the outer hall of the potter’s house at Rajagriha rose up before him from beginning to end, sentence by sentence, word by word. But after he had gone quite through it, he began again at the beginning. And every sentence was to him like a gate that stood at the head of the way to new avenues of thought which, in their turn, led to others. And he explored them all with measured step, and there was nothing which remained dark to him.</p>
			<p>And while his spirit, in such fashion, wove the Buddha thought into its own fabric until its last strand was exhausted, his body absorbed ever more of the astral matter which surrounded it, until what remained at last became transparent. And the darkness of universal night began to appear as a delicate blue that became ever darker.</p>
			<p>Whereupon Kamanita thought⁠—</p>
			<p>“Out there reigns the vast darkness of universal night. But a time will come when morning shall dawn and a new Brahma world come into existence. If my thoughts and acts were but to be directed towards becoming the hundred-thousand-fold Brahma whose office it will be to call the new world into existence, I do not see who would be likely to outrival me. For while all the beings of this Brahma world have sunk into helplessness and nonexistence, I am here at my post, watchful, and in full possession of my faculties. Yes, I could if I so wished, at this instant, summon all those beings into life, each in his place, and begin the new world day. But one thing I could not do⁠—I could never again call Vasitthi into being. Vasitthi has gone, in that passing away which leaves no seed of existence behind; neither god nor Brahma can find her. But what can life be to me without Vasitthi, who was its fairest and best? And what to me can a Brahma existence be, a life beyond which one is able to pass? And what the temporal, when there is an eternal?</p>
			<p>“There is an eternal and a way to the eternal.</p>
			<p>“An old forest Brahman once taught me that round about the heart a hundred fine arteries are spun, by means of which the soul is able to range throughout the whole body; that there is, however, but one which leads to the crown of the head⁠—that one by which the soul leaves the body. So there are also a hundred, yes, a thousand and a hundred thousand ways which lead hither and thither in this world, through many scenes of suffering, both where the probation is of long, and where it is of short, duration, where all is beautifully appointed and where all is hatefully appointed, through divine and human worlds, through animal kingdoms and underworlds. But there is only one way which leads absolutely out of this universe. That is the way to the eternal, the way to the untraversed land. I am now on that road. Well, then, I shall tread it to its end.”</p>
			<p>And he continued to dwell on the Buddha thought, of the way which leads to the end of all suffering.</p>
			<p>And ever darker became the blue of the diaphanous universal night.</p>
			<p>But when it began to grow almost black, the new Brahma flashed into existence, the hundred-thousand-fold Brahma, who illumines and preserves a hundred thousand worlds.</p>
			<p>And the Brahma sent forth a joyous summons to awake.</p>
			<p>“Wake up, ye beings, all who have rested throughout the whole of creation’s night in the lap of nothingness! Hither, to form the new Brahma universe, to enjoy the new world day, each one in his place, each one according to his strength!”</p>
			<p>And the beings and worlds came forth from the darkness of the void, star by star, and the jubilant shouts of a hundred thousand voices and the sound as of a hundred thousand drums and conch-horns rang in the answer⁠—</p>
			<p>“Hail! the hundred-thousand-fold Brahma who calls us to the new universe and the new day! Hail to us who are called to share the new day with him, and to reflect in bliss his divine glory!”</p>
			<p>When Kamanita saw and heard all this he was filled with deep pity.</p>
			<p>“These beings and these worlds, these stellar gods, and the hundred-thousand-fold Brahma himself shout for joy to welcome the world day⁠—rejoice in life. And why? Because they do not know it.”</p>
			<p>And this pity of his with the world, with the gods, and with the supreme god, vanquished in Kamanita the last remnant of his self-love.</p>
			<p>But he now considered⁠—</p>
			<p>“During this new day also, perfect Buddhas are certain to appear who will declare the truth. And when these divinities I see around me now, hear the truth with regard to their salvation, and remember that in the earliest dawn of the universal day they saw a being who went away out of the universe, then the memory will redound to their advantage. ‘Already one from our midst⁠—as it were a part of ourselves⁠—has preceded us on that road,’ they will say to themselves, and that will conduce to their salvation. So that I shall help all in helping myself. For no one can, in truth, help himself without helping all.”</p>
			<p>Very soon, some of the stellar gods, and, by and by, more of these, began to notice that there was one among them who did not shine like the others, ever brighter, but who, on the contrary, lost in brilliance.</p>
			<p>And they called to him⁠—</p>
			<p>“Ho, there, brother! Turn thy gaze upon the great hundred-thousand-fold Brahma in order that thou mayst recover brilliance and shine like us. For thou also, brother, art called to the bliss of reflecting the glory of the supreme god.”</p>
			<p>When the gods called to him thus, Kamanita neither looked nor listened.</p>
			<p>And the gods who saw him grow ever paler were very greatly troubled about him, And they appealed to Brahma.</p>
			<p>“Great Brahma, Our Light and Preserver, oh look upon this poor creature who is too weak to shine even as we, whose brilliance decreases always and does not increase! Oh give him of thy care, illumine, revivify him! For him also hast thou surely called to reflect in bliss thy divine glory.”</p>
			<p>And the great Brahma, full of tenderness for all created beings, turned his attention to Kamanita to refresh and strengthen him.</p>
			<p>But Kamanita’s light, nevertheless, decreased visibly.</p>
			<p>Then the great Brahma was more grieved that this one being would not suffer himself to be illumined by him and did not reflect his glory, than he was glad that a hundred thousand sunned themselves in his light, and hailed him with shouts of joy.</p>
			<p>And he withdrew a large part of his divinely illuminating power from the universe⁠—power sufficient to set a thousand worlds on fire⁠—and directed it on Kamanita.</p>
			<p>But Kamanita’s light continued to pale, as though drawing nearer to complete extinction.</p>
			<p>Brahma now became a prey to great anxiety.</p>
			<p>“This one star withdraws from my influence⁠—so I am not then omnipotent. I do not know the way he is going, so I am not omniscient. For he is not expiring as do the beings who expire in death, to be reborn each according to his works; not as the worlds go out in the Brahma night, only to shine forth again. What light illumines his way, seeing that he disdains mine? So there is then another light more luminous than mine? And a road which leads in the opposite direction to mine⁠—a road to the untraversed land? Shall I myself, mayhap, ever take that road⁠—that path to the untraversed land?”</p>
			<p>And now the minds of the stellar gods also became filled with great anxiety, great trouble.</p>
			<p>“This one withdraws from the power of the great Brahma, so then the great Brahma is not omnipotent? What light can be lighting his way, seeing that he disdains that of the great Brahma? So there is then another light more splendid than that which we so blissfully reflect? And a road that leads in the opposite direction to ours⁠—a road to the untraversed land? Shall we, mayhap, ever take that road⁠—the road to the untraversed land?”</p>
			<p>Then the hundred-thousand-fold Brahma pondered⁠—</p>
			<p>“My mind is made up. I shall reabsorb my illuminating power, now diffused throughout space, and shall plunge all these worlds again into the darkness of the Brahma night. And when I have gathered my light into a single ray, I shall turn it upon that one being in order yet to rescue him for this my Brahma world.”</p>
			<p>And the hundred-thousand-fold Brahma now reabsorbed all the illuminating power which he had diffused throughout space, so that the worlds sank again into the darkness of the Brahma night. And gathering his light into a single ray he directed it on Kamanita.</p>
			<p>“Henceforward there must shine at this point,” he thought, “the most radiant star in all my Brahma world.”</p>
			<p>Then the hundred-thousand-fold Brahma drew his ray with sufficient illuminating power to set a hundred thousand worlds on fire, back into himself, and again diffused his light throughout the whole of space.</p>
			<p>At the point, however, where he hoped to see the most radiant of all the stars, only a little, slowly dying spark was to be seen.</p>
			<p>And while in immeasurable space, worlds upon worlds flashed and shouted as they pressed forward into the new Brahma day, the pilgrim Kamanita went out quite, as a lamp goes out when it has consumed the last-drop of oil in its wick.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
